
======== PAGE 1 ========
i am your
optimisation 
heating, ventilation  
and air conditioning  
systems
guide

======== PAGE 2 ========
The Office of Environment and Heritage (OEH) has compiled this document in good faith, exercising all 
due care and attention. No representation is made about the accuracy, completeness or suitability of the 
information in this publication for any particular purpose. OEH shall not be liable for any damage which 
may occur to any person or organisation taking action or not on the basis of this publication. Readers 
should seek appropriate advice when applying the information to their specific needs. 
Published by:
Office of Environment and Heritage
59 Goulburn Street, Sydney NSW 2000
PO Box A290, Sydney South NSW 1232
Phone: (02) 9995 5000 (switchboard)
Phone: 131 555 (environment information and publications requests)
Phone: 1300 361 967 (national parks, general environmental enquiries, and publications requests)
Fax: (02) 9995 5999
TTY users: phone 133 677, then ask for 131 555
Speak and listen users: phone 1300 555 727, then ask for 131 555
Email: info@environment.nsw.gov.au
Website: www.environment.nsw.gov.au
Report pollution and environmental incidents
Environment Line: 131 555 (NSW only) or info@environment.nsw.gov.au
See also www.environment.nsw.gov.au
Photos: OEH, AIRAH, ThinkStock & iStock
ISBN 978 1 74359 990 1
OEH 2015/0317
July 2015

======== PAGE 3 ========
Optimising your heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems i
Foreword
This publication has been developed through an industry–government partnership between the 
NSW Office of Environment and Heritage’s (OEH) Energy Efficient Business (EEB) team and the 
Australian Institute of Refrigeration, Airconditioning and Heating (AIRAH). 
It aims to support the adoption of energy-efficiency initiatives in NSW businesses and brings 
together expertise from both organisations and across industry. 
OEH’s EEB team provides assistance to NSW businesses to reduce their energy consumption 
and costs, while enhancing productivity. The team has developed a suite of technology guides 
like this publication. These guides, which include resources on lighting, industrial refrigeration and 
cogeneration, are available free to download from the OEH website: www.environment.nsw.gov.au/
business. 
AIRAH is an independent, specialist, not-for-profit technical organisation providing leadership in 
the heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration (HVAC&R) sector through collaboration, 
engagement and professional development. AIRAH’s mission is to lead, promote, represent and 
support the HVAC and related services industry and membership. AIRAH produces a variety of 
publications, communications and training programs aimed at championing the highest of industry 
standards. AIRAH encourages world’s best practice within the industry and has forged a reputation 
for developing the competency and skills of industry practitioners at all levels.
This publication would not have been possible without input from the following contributors – Vince 
Aherne (AIRAH), Mark Henderson (SEiD), Jon Clarke (Norman, Disney and Young), John Penny 
(Viscon Systems), Paul Bannister (Energy Action/Exergy), Lasath Lecamwasam (Engineered 
Solutions for Building Sustainability), PC Thomas (Team Catalyst), Andrew Smith (A.G. Coombs 
Advisory), Alex Koncar (Greenkon Engineering), Steve Hennessy (WT Sustainability) and Patrick 
Riakos (OEH).
Disclaimer
HVAC systems are complex and the extent of actual or potential energy savings will vary greatly 
from one HVAC system to another. 
The examples and energy-savings potential discussed in this guide are not intended as 
specifications for implementation, nor should they be considered to provide instruction on how to 
complete measurement and verification calculations for the NSW Energy Savings Scheme.
It is advisable to employ specialist engineering support when developing a business case for any 
of the energy-efficiency opportunities outlined in this guide. OEH has a panel of specialists who will 
be able to assist with any optimisation project.  
Visit www.environment.nsw.gov.au/business/energy-efficiency-expert.htm.

======== PAGE 4 ========
ii Office of Environment and Heritage   
Foreword i
List of acronyms iv
Section 1 – Introduction 1
How to use this guide 2
Your key optimisation opportunities  3
The role of HVAC controls in reducing energy use  6
Where is energy wasted? 7
How to approach optimisation 8
Implementation  10
Potential savings 11
Simple payback period  11
Section 2 – System supervisory control optimisations  12
Opportunity 1 — Optimum start/stop programming 13
Opportunity 2 — Space temperature set points and control bands 18
Opportunity 3 — Master air handling unit supply air temperature signal 24
Opportunity 4 — Staging of chillers and compressors  29
Section 3 – Plant control parameter optimisations  34
Opportunity 5 — Duct static pressure reset 35
Opportunity 6 — Temperature reset – resetting heating hot water delivery temperature 40
Opportunity 7 — Temperature reset – resetting chilled water delivery temperature 40
Opportunity 8 — Temperature reset – resetting condenser water delivery temperature 40
Opportunity 9 — Retrofit of electronic expansion valves 45
Section 4 – Ventilation and air flow optimisations 48
Opportunity 10 — Economy cycle 49
Opportunity 11 — Night purge 54
Opportunity 12 — DCV – based on controlling CO2 for occupied spaces 59
Opportunity 13 — DCV – based on controlling CO for carparks and loading docks 59
Contents

======== PAGE 5 ========
Optimising your heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems iii
Section 5 – Variable speed based optimisations 66
Opportunity 14 — Optimised secondary chilled water pumping  
(differential pressure reset) 67
Opportunity 15 — Variable head pressure control (air-cooled condensers) 71
Opportunity 16 — Variable head pressure control (water-cooled condensers) 74
Other variable speed applications for HVAC 77
Integrating multiple HVAC variable speed drive controllers 79
Section 6 – Best practice HVAC operation and maintenance 80
Opportunity 17 — Energy management planning 81
Opportunity 18 — Energy management training and awareness 86
Opportunity 19 — Energy efficiency maintenance 88
Opportunity 20 — Management of system control software 93
Section 7 – Other HVAC optimisation opportunities 95
Optimising existing fan/pump distribution systems 96
Rebalancing distribution systems 97
Duct leakage 99
Optimising boilers 99
Demand response 10 0
Occupancy control 10 0
Free cooling 10 0
Section 8 – Maintaining your HVAC optimisation 10 1
Maintaining the benefits of your optimisation 10 2
Appendix A: Main areas of energy waste 10 4
Appendix B: Documents and resources 10 5
Appendix C: HVAC optimisation and the NSW Energy Savings Scheme 10 7
Appendix D: Explaining the fan (and pump) affinity laws 10 9

======== PAGE 5 ========
Optimising your heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems iii
Section 5 – Variable speed based optimisations 66
Opportunity 14 — Optimised secondary chilled water pumping  
(differential pressure reset) 67
Opportunity 15 — Variable head pressure control (air-cooled condensers) 71
Opportunity 16 — Variable head pressure control (water-cooled condensers) 74
Other variable speed applications for HVAC 77
Integrating multiple HVAC variable speed drive controllers 79
Section 6 – Best practice HVAC operation and maintenance 80
Opportunity 17 — Energy management planning 81
Opportunity 18 — Energy management training and awareness 86
Opportunity 19 — Energy efficiency maintenance 88
Opportunity 20 — Management of system control software 93
Section 7 – Other HVAC optimisation opportunities 95
Optimising existing fan/pump distribution systems 96
Rebalancing distribution systems 97
Duct leakage 99
Optimising boilers 99
Demand response 10 0
Occupancy control 10 0
Free cooling 10 0
Section 8 – Maintaining your HVAC optimisation 10 1
Maintaining the benefits of your optimisation 10 2
Appendix A: Main areas of energy waste 10 4
Appendix B: Documents and resources 10 5
Appendix C: HVAC optimisation and the NSW Energy Savings Scheme 10 7
Appendix D: Explaining the fan (and pump) affinity laws 10 9

======== PAGE 13 ========
Optimising your heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems 5
Page
Optimisation  
strategy
Energy-saving 
potential
(Individual,  
non-cumulative)
Central 
water-
cooled 
CHW 
system  
w/AHUs
Central 
water-
cooled 
CHW 
system  
w/FCUs
Central 
air-
cooled 
CHW 
system 
(AHU)
Central 
direct 
expansion 
(DX) 
plants – 
AHUs
Ducted 
direct 
expansion 
(DX) 
systems
Small direct 
expansion 
(DX) 
systems 
(split and 
packaged)
Operation 
24/7
Regulated 
relative 
humidity 
(museums, 
galleries 
etc.)
Variable 
occupancy 
spaces
Enclosed 
spaces with 
combustion 
engines
54 11. Night purge
Up to 20% of energy 
consumed by AC 
compressors, during  
start-up time
Y N Y Y Y N N N Y N/A
59
12. Demand control 
ventilation (DCV): 
carbon dioxide (CO2)3
Up to 20% of space cooling 
and heating energy 
required for pre-treating of 
outdoor air (O/A)
Y Y Y Y2 Y2 N Y Y Y N/A
59 13. DCV: carbon 
monoxide (CO)
Up to 80% of energy 
consumed by carpark 
ventilation fans
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Y N/A Y N/A
67
14. Optimised 
secondary chilled 
water (SCHW) 
pumping
Up to 30% of energy 
consumed by SCHW pumps Y Y Y N N N Y Y Y N/A
71
15. Variable head 
pressure control (air-
cooled condensers)
Up to 30% of energy 
consumed by condenser 
fans
N N Y Y4 Y4 N Y Y Y N/A
74
16. Variable head 
pressure control 
(water-cooled 
condensers)
Up to 30% of energy  
consumed by CW pumps Y Y Y Y2 Y2 N Y Y Y N/A
81
17. Energy 
management 
planning
Up to 50% of total energy 
consumed, depending on 
depth and commitment
Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
86
18. Energy 
management training 
and awareness
Up to 10% of total energy 
consumed Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
88 19. Energy-efficiency 
maintenance
Up to 20% of total energy 
consumed by HVAC services Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
93
20. Management 
of system control 
software
Up to 10% of energy  
consumed by HVAC services Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y
Notes: 1 Hot water space air heating;  2 Water-cooled;  3 Not applicable for 100 per cent O/A supply applications (operating theatres, pet shops, morgues, laboratories with animals, battery rooms, etc);   
4 Air-cooled

======== PAGE 14 ========
6 Office of Environment and Heritage   
The role of HVAC controls in reducing energy use 
The main components of a typical HVAC commercial system are outlined in Figure 1. Central to 
many of the optimisation strategies outlined in this guide are the controls.
HVAC controls regulate the heating and/or air conditioning of designated areas, usually through a 
sensing device that compares the actual state of the space – for example, its temperature – with a 
target state. The control system then draws a conclusion as to what action needs to be taken – for 
example, start the heating element.
These control systems range from built-in proprietary controllers, to independent direct digital 
controls (DDC) or building-wide building management system (BMS) controls.
A BMS consists of a number of DDC that communicate via a network infrastructure and report to 
a computer, referred to as a head-end, supervisor or operator workstation. This central computer 
sends operational parameters such as set points and time schedules throughout the system and 
to individual plant controllers. The controllers can send back operational information such as 
temperature, alarms and system performance.
BMSs are also referred to as building management and control systems, building automation 
systems or building automation and control Systems. For consistency, the term BMS is used 
throughout this guide.
Figure 1: Main components of a typical commercial HVAC system
Outdoor 
air intake
Cooling tower
Air handling 
unit
Ducts Diﬀuser
Terminal unit/ 
VAV box
Pumps for chilled water, 
hot water & cooling 
tower
Building  
management 
system
Chiller
Boiler
Zone carbon 
dioxide sensor
Zone temperature 
sensor

======== PAGE 34 ========
26 Office of Environment and Heritage   
The control strategy for the AHU is usually via a PI S/A temperature control algorithm and not direct 
control of the heating and cooling coils. It is best practice to include a disable/enable function within 
the BMS or DDC for each sensor to help deal with faulty sensors. When disabled, the sensor is 
taken out of the control algorithm, until the defect is remedied.
Chilled water or
hot water valve
Valve modulates depending on how 
much cooling or heating is needed
a.  True average   
b.  High select   
c.  Weighted average   
Space temperature 
set point 23˚C
SPACE  1
SPACE  2
SPACE  3
SPACE  4
SPACE  5
Actual space 
temperature
22˚C
24˚C
26˚C
20˚C
18˚C
Supply 
air
M
Building
management
system
Most energy eﬃcient way to create 
Master temperature signal:
Air 
handling 
unit Supply
air fan
Figure 5: Control 
strategies to generate 
a master air handling 
unit supply air 
temperature signal 
Chilled 
water
(CHW) valve
M
S/A ﬂow
Chilled 
water
pump
T
CHILLER
    Chillers and 
pumps use 
less power
   
* Building
management
system
     Energy saving tip: 
During mild weather conditions, 
warmer supply air can satisfy 
your cooling needs, allowing 
you to reduce chilled water ﬂow 
through air handling units
Air 
handling 
unit Supply
air fan
Figure 6: Opportunity for 
supply air temperature 
reset – constant air volume 
system
Any localised extreme space temperatures require prompt action as they can compromise the 
efficiency of the entire HVAC system. The system controls should give the operator the ability 
to disregard signals from faulty zones, or from zones that are not critical for comfort.

======== PAGE 37 ========
Optimising your heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems 29
Opportunity 4 — Staging of chillers and compressors 
 UP  
 TO 10% CHILLER ENERGY 
REDUCTION
The main objective of chiller staging is to match the capacity of the operating chillers to the demand 
of the field equipment that consumes chilled water (CHW). For optimisation, chiller sequencing 
must go beyond simply matching the refrigeration capacity and CHW flow rates; it must take a 
holistic view that considers efficiency across the full operating range for each chiller and take into 
account the power consumed by ancillaries including condenser water (CW) pumps and cooling 
tower fans. Depending on the equipment installed and the configuration of the CHW system, it 
may be more efficient to operate two chillers in part-load rather than one chiller at full load. The 
converse may be true for other systems.
Strategy summary
This strategy involves using the most efficient chiller to meet cooling demand and/or operating 
multiple compressors optimally by staging refrigeration compressors within the chillers and direct 
expansion (DX) air conditioning (AC) systems. This strategy is mainly written around primary-
only CHW systems. Different strategies would apply for a primary/secondary system and it is 
recommended that expert advice is sought in this case.
When multiple chillers serve a facility, there are several factors that determine how they respond to 
actual cooling requirements from the field. Some chillers have multiple (typically twin) refrigeration 
circuits and modulate the cooling capacity of each compressor using means such as cylinder 
unloading (for reciprocating types), displacement slider control (for screw types) or variable speed 
drive (VSD) control of motor (for multiple types). Other chillers have banks of compressors 
connected to common manifolds and the compressors are brought online to meet increasing 
demand.
Chiller with local 
control panel 

======== PAGE 39 ========
Optimising your heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems 31
• CHW flow temperature (indicating actual cooling needs)
• an indication of the cooling capacity of the present cooling stages, ideally through measuring 
motor current and comparing to the recommended maximum
• the efficiency characteristics of each chiller at different loads
• power consumption of the associated ancillaries
• stage-up time delay (time delay before next cooling stage is engaged)
• stage-down time delay (time delay before the existing cooling stage is disengaged).
Figure 7 illustrates the recommended system logic criteria and control parameters for the staging of 
chillers.
TIP: Stage-up time for chillers (particularly low-load chillers) may need seasonal 
readjustment during summer months to ensure that greater sudden heat loads can be 
accommodated by CHW systems.
Current practice
Chillers are sometimes enabled on time signals which are based on occupancy and/or prevailing 
ambient temperatures, which can be wasteful due to requiring longer system operating hours. This 
control strategy is easy to program; however, it is wasteful. Chillers must only be enabled from 
reliable cooling calls generated by field equipment that use CHW, such as AHUs.
Many CHW systems are controlled by the BMS, which stage the number of chillers in operation 
based on the CHW return temperature, with a short stage-up time (10 minutes or less). This 
practice does not recognise the specific energy-efficiency performance of different multiple-chiller 
configurations and their operational characteristics.
This control practice creates higher than necessary chiller energy consumption and maintenance 
costs due to:
• earlier than necessary engagement of higher cooling stage with additional energy consumption 
for chiller and associated CW and CHW pumps
• operation of some of the chillers in energy-inefficient (very low load) operating conditions
• longer than needed chiller operating hours (resulting in greater wear and tear)
• short-cycling of AC compressors of the next stage chillers (resulting in greater wear and tear).
The problem can become worse with uncalibrated CHW temperature sensors and/or energy-
inefficient internal control settings of chillers.
Opportunity for optimisation
Several control-improvement steps can be undertaken to minimise the energy consumption of a 
CHW system having multiple chillers, including:
• add additional stage-up criteria to BMS to ensure that the next stage is not prematurely engaged, 
including:
 - percentage of current draw, in comparison to manufacturer’s recommended maximum values
 - actual field cooling load (calculated by BMS, based on CHW supply and return temperature 
and flow rate)
 - Note: failure to meet CHW flow temperature set point is a good stage-up criterion and is more 
reliable than CHW return temperature.
• increase stage-up time as far as practical (up to 20 minutes)

======== PAGE 40 ========
32 Office of Environment and Heritage   
TIP: In the case of a low-load chiller associated with spaces where a sudden increase of 
cooling load is possible, stage-up time should be minimised (to around five minutes). A typical 
example is a shopping centre at opening time.
• minimise stage-down time as far as practical (five minutes or less)
• minimise pre and post ‘cooling call’ operating time of CHW and CW pumps for the given type of 
chillers (one to five minutes typically) in line with the chiller manufacturer’s recommendations
• check and optimise internal chiller controls (minimum engaged power, CHW cut-in and cut-out 
temperature set points, sharing load control strategy, cooling trends, etc.). The integral chiller 
controllers should be optimised by the chiller manufacturer
• introduce a high level interface (HLI) into the HVAC control loop, so that the BMS can monitor 
internal chiller control parameters and assist building operators to diagnose inefficiency and non-
performance of chiller controllers
• starting configuration of chillers should not be selected based on O/A temperature but rather a 
standard staging with minimised stage-up time.
Alternatively, chiller operating sequence could be seasonally adjusted with the initial starting stage 
determined by the building load at start-up. Matching the chiller capacity to the load at start-up will 
reduce the time for the plant to match the load and reduce optimal plant start times.
Chiller cooling call lock-outs
The inclusion of a chiller cooling call lock-out in the chiller control algorithm is a ‘belt and braces’ 
approach to preventing chillers operating wastefully due to spurious cooling calls. The control logic 
for chiller lock-outs may be time- and/or temperature-based. An example of a time-based lock-
out is when cooling calls are disabled after-hours or during cooler months as scheduled on the 
BMS. An example of a temperature-based lock-out would be when cooling calls are disabled when 
ambient temperature is below 12–15°C.
Lock-outs should ideally be used after other optimisation measures have been adopted to prevent 
wasteful cooling calls and as an additional safety measure to prevent energy wastage due to 
component failures such as sensors drifting out of calibration and/or ad hoc changes by staff. Any 
cooling calls that occur while chillers have been 
locked out must be logged, investigated and rectified.
Energy-saving potential, costs, benefits and risks
Optimised staging of chillers and compressors can immediately improve the energy efficiency of 
the associated CHW systems and save up to 10 per cent of the energy consumed by chillers and 
associated components.
Application notes
The proposed HVAC optimisation strategy typically applies to larger centralised HVAC systems 
which incorporate multiple chillers and/or multiple compressors, and that are controlled by a BMS 
or central controller. The strategy provides the most benefit where there is a significant variable 
demand on the cooling system and the existing performance characteristics at part-loads are 
understood and can be reliably incorporated into the new control algorithm.

======== PAGE 41 ========
Optimising your heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems 33
Getting started
Steps that should be taken to implement this optimisation strategy include:
• add additional stage-up criteria to the BMS to ensure that the next stage is not prematurely 
engaged
• minimise pre and post ‘cooling call’ operating time of CHW and CW pumps for the given type 
of chillers 
• check and optimise internal chiller controls 
• introduce a high level interface into the HVAC control loop
• start a configuration of chillers based on O/A temperature.

======== PAGE 51 ========
Optimising your heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems 43
For every 1°C increase in chilled water temperature, chiller compressors consume 2–3 per cent 
less energy for fixed-speed compressors and 4–5 per cent for variable speed compressors.
Typically, CHW is supplied in most systems at temperatures between 6–7°C for most systems 
under design conditions; however, this temperature can be reset upwards to around 10–12°C 
during milder weather, providing there are no adverse effects such as the loss of de-humidification 
(humidity control). Increased CHW temperature will reduce chiller energy consumption; however, 
it could require additional pumping energy and/or increased S/A flow. These increases should be 
considered when calculating the overall benefits from this optimisation strategy.
For CHW systems that have long CHW circuits, the pumping power is significant. In these 
circumstances, variable CHW flow, on secondary circuits, may be a more appropriate strategy for 
energy saving than CHW temperature reset and should be assessed on a case-by-case basis. 
Generally, for short CHW circuits, CHW temperature reset is more energy efficient as savings in 
pumping power are smaller, relative to potential gains in chiller efficiency through CHW reset.
Variable speed chillers typically have a better response to increased CHW temperature than fixed-
speed chillers. Similar behaviour occurs when CW temperature is reduced.
Figure 10 shows that, during mild weather conditions, warmer than standard CHW temperatures 
can satisfy the cooling load. Raising the CHW temperature will reduce the electricity consumption 
of chillers.
Optimisation of condenser water
For every 1°C decrease in CW, chiller compressors consume 2–3 per cent less energy for fixed-
speed compressors and 4–5 per cent less for variable speed compressors.
Cooling towers are typically designed to produce CW at temperatures that are 3–4°C higher than 
the prevailing ambient wet bulb temperature. This temperature difference is called the cooling tower 
‘approach’.
CW temperature reset is based on the modulation of the cooling tower fan speeds to track 
the ambient wet bulb temperature, which provides the lowest possible condensing conditions. 
Optimisation is essentially a balancing exercise between reduced chiller energy consumption (due 
Tip: You can save energy by increasing the chilled water temperature during part-load conditions.
Where condensing boilers are installed, they are more efficient when the return temperature is 
maintained below 55°C – which is the typical dew point of flue gases for natural gas-fired boilers. 
As such, it is important to maintain the boilers at as low a HHW flow temperature as possible, 
except for the relatively short periods of the year when full heating system capacity is required; 
typically during extremely cold weather and/or during early morning warm-up periods. During 
periods of high heating demand, the HHW flow temperature should be reset to 80–85°C when 
condensing boilers have reached their maximum output. The HHW flow temperature should 
be reset to 80–85°C and the condensing boiler used as the lead boiler before additional (non-
condensing type) boilers are brought online. 
For additional information on optimising HHW boilers, refer to Optimising multiple boiler/water 
heater systems in Section 7.
Optimisation of chilled water

======== PAGE 54 ========
46 Office of Environment and Heritage   
Significant energy 
savings can be made 
from retrofitting direct 
expansion-type chillers 
like the one pictured 
Principle and equipment
The function of TXVs in DX vapour compression refrigeration systems is to regulate the refrigerant 
flow through the system while maintaining a minimum level of superheat in the refrigerant gas 
leaving the evaporator. This ensures that there are no droplets of unevaporated refrigerant that 
could cause damage to the compressors. TXVs are mechanical devices and, as such, their degree 
of control is limited. EEVs are more sophisticated and can perform the task of regulating refrigerant 
flow more precisely and with a smaller margin of the superheat required for the protection of the 
compressor from ‘liquid slugging’. This improves the efficiency of the compressor and reduces 
energy consumption.
Minimum required information
The minimum required information for retrofitting EEVs includes:
• age of equipment or system
• system refrigerant type and expected life
• system capacity
• system operating parameters – evaporating and condensing
• pressure drop across EEV
• whether the refrigeration system operates on a pump-down cycle
• interfacing EEV controls with BMS for monitoring.
Minimum required equipment
The minimum equipment includes:
• field sensors (temperature, pressure)
• controllers and data processors
• EEV.
Current practice
Most new AC systems have EEV devices, while many older systems (i.e. older than 5–10 years) 
typically have TXVs. Wear will degrade the operation of TXVs through control drift while superheat 
is often set conservatively, erring on safety; both of which will compromise the energy efficiency of 
the device.

======== PAGE 70 ========
62 Office of Environment and Heritage   
Carpark applications
AS 1668.2 mandates maximum CO levels of 30 ppm for a staffed carpark and 60 ppm for an 
unstaffed carpark. The Standard also mandates a series of ventilation control requirements 
depending on detected CO levels and system flow rates. Set points are often adjusted lower than 
the minimum requirements of the Standard (e.g. to ~ 20 or 50 ppm CO as applicable) recognising 
the significant potential adverse health impacts of excessive CO exposure. Another reason to 
exceed the minimum requirements of the Standard is that the AS 1668.2 DCV method does 
not take into account other factors, including the fumes given off by increasingly popular diesel 
vehicles, where the emissions of nitrogen oxide (NOx) is a concern. Variable speed supply or 
return fans (or both) provide a variable ventilation rate in response to detected levels and controller 
set points.
Figure 15 shows DCV operation where the performance of fans is adjusted to suit the actual level of 
pollution in the carpark, as sensed by the CO sensors.
Typically, the CO2 concentration has to exceed 1500–2000 ppm before the effects of inadequate 
ventilation are detected. CO2 set points may be set higher (typically 800–1000 ppm) providing 
other factors are favourable and include the degree of air filtration, the type of air distribution, the 
absence of materials that emit volatile organic compounds and the type of activity performed in the 
space (sedentary or active, transient or continuous).
Figure 14 shows the benefits of DCV where the amount of O/A is adjusted appropriate to the actual 
number of people in the conditioned space, in real-time.
Demand control ventilation is likely to be most beneficial for controlling the ventilation of 
spaces with variable occupancy – meeting rooms, entertainment centres, cinemas, foyers, 
shopping malls, food courts etc. are ideal candidates. Modulating dampers or variable speed 
fans are used to adjust the rate of O/A ventilation in response to detected levels of CO
2 and 
controller set points.
Outdoor 
air
Outdoor 
air
Outdoor 
air
Excessive amount of outdoor air 
introduced into space when 
occupancy is low
An optimised system will reduce the 
amount of outdoor air to match occupancy 
and maintain the given CO2 Set Point
Building
management
system
          Chillers, boilers 
and pumps will use 
less energy
System has been designed for 
full occupancy and will supply a 
maximum amount of outdoor air
VSD
CO2 
Figure 14: Demand 
control ventilation of 
spaces with variable 
occupancy

======== PAGE 74 ========
66 Office of Environment and Heritage   
Variable speed based optimisations
This section discusses a series of optimisation opportunities based on the modification of 
plant and systems to use a variable speed control. A common way of changing a system to 
variable speed is the installation of variable speed drives to the fan, pump or compressor 
motors.
This section identifies three optimisation opportunities:
• Opportunity 14 – Optimised secondary chilled water pumping
• Opportunity 15 – Variable head pressure control (air-cooled)
• Opportunity 16 – Variable head pressure control (water-cooled).
This section also discusses other potential variable speed applications for energy-saving 
potential within HVAC.
five

======== PAGE 75 ========
Optimising your heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems 67
Opportunity 14 — Optimised secondary chilled water 
pumping (differential pressure reset)
UP 
 TO30% ENERGY REDUCTION ON 
SECONDARY CHILLED WATER PUMPS
Strategy summary
This strategy minimises the pumping energy required to distribute chilled water (CHW) by 
optimising the CHW distribution system using system differential pressure reset control. This 
strategy is applicable to secondary chilled water (SCHW) systems that have 2-port modulating 
valves and hence a variable flow.
For systems that have 3-port modulating valves (constant flow), it is essential to convert the system 
to 2-port, either by modifying the existing valves through shutting down the bypass port (if this is 
acceptable for the type of valve) or replacing with 2-port valves.
The secondary chilled water pumping system distributes CHW from the CHW plant room to CHW 
users such as air handling units (AHUs) and fan coil units (FCUs). The SCHW distribution system 
does not pump CHW through chillers as this function is carried out by the primary CHW pumps. 
While this strategy mainly refers to the optimisation of existing SCHW pumping systems, the control 
logic would also be applicable to new SCHW systems.
Secondary chilled 
water pumps
Variable secondary chilled water pumping, using system differential pressure reset, allows for 
the minimisation of energy consumption required for pumping of chilled water to plant that 
uses chilled water, such as air handling units and fan coil units.
Principle and equipment
Space cooling for many buildings is achieved through the circulation of CHW through AHUs, which 
cools a mixture of return air (R/A) and outdoor air (O/A) when the air flows over CHW coils. The air 
mixture then becomes cooled supply air (S/A) that is ducted to conditioned spaces at a required 
rate to offset the external and internal heat load. The CHW generated by chillers in the plant room 
is circulated to remote CHW users (AHUs and FCUs) using CHW pumps that distribute CHW 
through pipework and control valves.

======== PAGE 76 ========
68 Office of Environment and Heritage   
A significant advantage of SCHW pumping is that there is no limit in its capacity to reduce 
CHW flow during part-load conditions, apart from satisfying the cooling needs of conditioned 
spaces. As such, significant energy savings are possible, especially in large buildings/
systems. For this reason, primary/secondary variable CHW pumping can save much more CHW 
pumping energy than primary variable CHW pumping. An additional advantage is that SCHW 
pumps, which are typically centrifugal pumps, save more energy when flow rates are reduced.
Primary chilled water pumping
When CHW is circulated to the CHW users by the same pumps that pump CHW through the 
chillers, this CHW distribution system is known as a primary-only CHW pumping system. Under 
part-load, less CHW is required by users; however, variable speed drive (VSD) control of primary 
CHW pumping is limited in its ability to reduce CHW 
flow, as the chillers require minimum CHW flow 
rates to operate satisfactorily, as specified by the manufacturer.
Note: primary CHW pumping can sometimes be variable and can be turned down to quite a low 
level, depending on the minimum chiller flow requirement.
Primary/secondary chilled water pumping
When CHW is distributed to CHW users via a separate CHW pump, in addition to the pump that 
pumps CHW through the chiller, this CHW distribution system is 
known as a primary/secondary 
CHW pumping system.
The concept of a variable SCHW flow is based on the fact that during part-load conditions or mild 
weather, 
the amount of CHW required for cooling is less than that required during summer peaks. The 
variable CHW flow reduces the amount of energy required for pumping.
In a primary/secondary CHW distribution system, the primary CHW loop is limited to the HVAC 
chiller plant room, recirculating CHW through the chillers using primary CHW pumps. These pumps 
are typically smaller as they only have to overcome the CHW pressure drop through chillers and 
the relatively small CHW pipework/loop.
SCHW pumping distributes CHW from the HVAC chiller plant room to CHW users, typically via long 
multi-branch SCHW pipework systems. SCHW pumps are usually much larger than primary CHW 
pumps.
Minimum required information
The minimum information required for optimising SCHW pumping using system differential 
pressure reset includes:
• cooling call signal to enable the SCHW pumps
• CHW pressure differential of index run – the run with the highest pressure drop
• position of CHW valves shown in order (via percentile function of BMS)
• software for automated adjustment of speed and number of CHW pumps, at regular time 
intervals.
Minimum required equipment
The minimum equipment required for optimising SCHW pumping using system differential pressure 
reset includes:
• field sensors (CHW pressure differential across an index CHW user)
• DDC controllers

======== PAGE 77 ========
Optimising your heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems 69
CHW valve 1
CHW valve 2
CHW valve 3
CHW valve 4
CHW valve 5
CHW valve 6
CHW valve 7
CHW valve n
      p
signal is
maintained        p is the pressure diﬀerential across an Index Run – 
the air handling unit with the highest pressure drop
Secondary 
chilled water pump
(SCHWP)
Variable 
speed drive
Building
management
system 
Expected conditions 
during warm weather:
•  Outdoor air ~32˚C
•  Some of the valves open 100%
Figure 16: Minimised 
pumping energy at 
secondary chilled 
water loop – operation 
of HVAC system 
under full-load 
(typical summer peak) 
conditions
• SCHW control software
• SCHW pumps
• VSDs for pumps.
Current practice
Currently, most CHW-based HVAC systems distribute CHW by:
• using a primary-only CHW distribution system with constant flow. In this case, to achieve the full 
benefits through system differential pressure reset, the system has to be modified for primary/
secondary with variable secondary flow achieved through the modification of the 3-port control 
valves by shutting the bypass port (if the valve is suitable for this) or the replacement of the 
3-port control valves with 2-port valves and the installation of a VSD
• using a primary-only CHW distribution system with limited variable secondary flow, which 
uses an arrangement of a bypass valve in combination with a VSD. There is limited scope for 
optimisation of this system
• using a primary/secondary CHW distribution system in which the SCHW pump is controlled by 
a set CHW pressure differential signal. The optimisation of this type of system is covered later in 
this section.
Pump uses 
less power* 
      Energy saving tip: 
You now have the opportunity to slow down the 
SCHWP, reducing pressure, to maintain the gradual 
opening of chilled water valves of up to 95%
*
    
CHW valve 1
CHW valve 2
CHW valve 3
CHW valve 4
CHW valve 5
CHW valve 6
CHW valve 7
CHW valve n
Secondary 
chilled water pump
(SCHWP)
Variable 
speed drive
Building
management
system 
Expected conditions 
during mild weather:
•  Outside air ~20˚C
•  All valves open less than 80%
Figure 17: Minimised 
pumping energy at 
SCHW loop - Operation 
of HVAC system under 
part-load conditions

======== PAGE 78 ========
70 Office of Environment and Heritage   
Opportunity for optimisation
The typical strategy used for the control of CHW secondary pumps in variable flow distribution 
circuits is to set the pump to maintain a constant pressure set point, which is typically selected for 
the peak design CHW flow. This results in the pump maintaining too high a static pressure most of 
the time and as such, energy is wasted.
For such systems, the following optimisation strategy for the SCHW pumping system is 
recommended in order to minimise the energy consumption during part-load conditions:
• When all CHW valves are less than 95 per cent open, SCHW pumps provide higher than 
needed CHW pressure. In such situations, the speed of the SCHW pump can be reduced on 
an incremental basis (CHW pressure set point reset) to maintain an opening of 95 per cent of 
the most open CHW valve. CHW is thereby delivered at the lowest possible pressure while still 
satisfying the CHW needs of all CHW users.
Figures 16 and 17 show that there is an opportunity to achieve further savings with SCHW pumps 
during mild weather conditions when the pump can slow its speed to allow for more frequent 
opening of semi-closed CHW valves.
Tip: Check CHW balancing/operation for the valves that are 100 per cent open more  often than the 
other CHW valves.
Energy-saving potential, costs, benefits and risks
Optimised SCHW pumping is typically a cost-effective HVAC energy-efficiency improvement as it 
requires minimal investment and immediately reduces the energy consumption of the HVAC system 
by reducing its load. Costs significantly increase if 2-port valves need to be retrofitted. This strategy 
can save up to up to 30 per cent of energy consumed by SCHW pumps.
Benefits arising from SCHW pumping include:
• reduced energy cost of CHW pumping
• reduced GHG emissions
• reduced HVAC maintenance costs.
Application notes
Optimised SCHW pumping applies to SCHW pumps in centralised CHW HVAC systems, which 
include remote AHUs and/or FCUs.
Getting started
Implementation for the SCHW strategy will involve setting up compatible software to automate 
the adjustment of speeds of the CHW pumps at regular intervals. The type of CHW valves and 
their pressure characteristics will also need to be investigated to determine compatibility with 
this control strategy.

======== PAGE 82 ========
74 Office of Environment and Heritage   
Opportunity 16 — Variable head pressure control  
(water-cooled condensers)
UP 
 TO30% ENERGY REDUCTION ON 
CHILLED WATER PUMPS
Strategy summary
Controlling the head pressure of water-cooled condensers improves the energy efficiency of air 
conditioning systems in part-load conditions. This optimisation strategy involves applying variable 
speed drive (VSD) controllers to pumps for head pressure control of single water-cooled direct 
expansion (DX) units. It also involves applying condenser water (CW) modulating head pressure 
valves for head pressure control of multiple water-cooled, AC DX units supplied by CW from one 
CW pump.
Implementation of this optimisation strategy could result in reduced energy consumption 
of CW pumps by 10–30 per cent and improved control and reliability of the operation of AC 
systems during part-load conditions. 
Principle and equipment
During lower ambient air temperatures, the AC load typically decreases while the capacity of 
condensers increases. Energy savings are therefore possible by reducing the condensing pressure 
of the refrigeration cycle. This reduced pressure can then be maintained by VSD-controlled pumps, 
which would save additional energy compared to a control scenario where the pump is running at 
fixed speed.
Appropriate head pressure or condensing pressure is important for the proper operation of AC and 
refrigeration systems with head pressure maintained in several ways. The most energy efficient 
way of maintaining condensing pressure (constant or, even better, floating set point) of water-
cooled condensers is to adjust the amount of heat rejection in condensers:
• by VSD controllers for single AC units
• via CW-modulating head pressure valves (for multiple AC units, that are supplied CW from one 
CW pump).
For multiple AC units that are supplied CW from a pump controlled by a VSD (such as 
supplementary tenant AC systems), it is also important to automatically shut off the water supply 
to the condenser when the AC unit is not operating. This will significantly reduce the energy 
consumption of the CW pump.
Caution: 
AC systems should maintain adequate condensing (or head) pressure in order to enable the 
proper operation of the vapour compression refrigeration cycle. Supplying more CW than 
required will extract more heat from the condenser, thereby causing over-cooling or over-
condensing of an AC system. Over-condensing reduces the condensing temperature and 
condensing pressure, compromising the performance of the vapour-compression refrigeration 
cycle of the system. 

======== PAGE 83 ========
Optimising your heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems 75
Water cooled 
condenser/chiller
Minimum required information
The minimum required information for maintaining head pressure includes:
• head pressure set point
• control strategy for modulation of the amount of heat rejection
• type of refrigerant.
Minimum required equipment
The minimum required equipment includes:
• field sensors (temperature, pressure)
• controllers and data processors
• CW pump
• if the CW pump supplies CW to multiple DX AC units, a head pressure control is required
• VSD controllers.
Current practice
Most water-cooled condensers employ one of the following common control strategies to maintain 
head pressure:
• constant CW flow as per manufacturer’s requirement
• constant CW flow as per HVAC system designer’s requirements.
Both control strategies ensure sufficient heat rejection during the hottest O/A conditions; however, 
they potentially compromise part-load performance of associated AC DX units due to the risk from 
over-condensing. The additional CW flow also results in wasted energy at the CW pump.
In many buildings, CW continues to circulate through the AC units even when they are not in 
operation, thereby wasting energy at the CW pump.

======== PAGE 85 ========
Optimising your heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems 77
Getting started
Variable head pressure control strategy optimisation for water-cooled condensers is 
implemented through similar strategies to those of air-cooled condensers. 
Other variable speed applications for HVAC
Strategy summary
Apart from the uses of VSDs for motors discussed so far, there are many other HVAC applications 
in which VSDs are employed. Some of these are applied to achieve energy savings, while the main 
role of other applications could be to serve as soft-starters i.e. as electrical devices to optimise 
the starting current of motors. As these applications are not essential for major energy savings in 
HVAC systems, but are still important, their basic characteristics are briefly explained below.
Appendix D outlines the relationship between flow rate, pressure and the energy consumed by a 
fan or pump. These affinity laws can be used to estimate energy savings.
Principle and equipment
When retrofitting VSDs, motors should always be checked for their ability to run at reduced speeds. 
Older motors, typically more than 20 years old, may also have insulation that is brittle and the 
installation of VSDs could lead to premature failure. However, in most cases, the cost of a new 
motor will be small in comparison to the potential energy savings and other benefits.
Throttled (choked) 
distribution system

======== PAGE 86 ========
78 Office of Environment and Heritage   
The photo (previous page) shows two partially throttled valves that are being used to regulate the 
water flow through a CW system. The same water flow can be maintained by opening the valves 
and reducing the speed of the pump by using a VSD. This optimisation strategy will save system 
energy as reducing pump speeds reduces pump power consumption (see Section 7 on optimising 
distribution systems).
Opportunity for optimisation
Supply air fans (constant air volume applications) in air handling units
During mild weather conditions, the amount of S/A can often be reduced without compromising 
comfort while saving up to 50 per cent of fan energy.
Typical settings would be:
• speed changes between 70–100 per cent corresponding to O/A temperatures from 23–27°C 
(adjustable)
• the VSD controllers would run the S/A fan at 100 per cent speed if the O/A is higher than 27°C
• the VSD controllers would run the S/A fan at 70 per cent if the O/A is below 23°C
• if the O/A temperature is between 23–27°C, the speed would be adjusted based on a linear 
function between the O/A temperature and the speed of the S/A fan
• an override function would be available to increase the speed of the fan if space temperature 
increases at lower O/A temperatures.
Alternatively, the indoor temperature can be used to control the fan speed.
Minimum O/A flows for ventilation should be sufficient at all times, in line with AS 1668.2 
requirements.
A minimum fan speed/air flow is required to maintain the air diffusion from the S/A registers; motors 
should be checked for allowable speed turndown. 
Primary chilled water pumps
The amount of CHW pumped to the field and the energy consumed by CHW pumps can be 
reduced in response to the reduced cooling load during part-load conditions of HVAC systems.
This potential energy saving is limited by the minimum CHW flow required for associated chillers. 
Primary CHW flow controlled with a VSD varies between a minimum and maximum flow rate and 
is based on the type of chiller. Minimal value is typically set as 10–15 kilopascals (kPa) above CHW 
pressure differential settings for a chiller’s flow switch, to ensure proper operation of the chiller 
during low CHW flow conditions.
With the introduction of a secondary CHW loop, this potential greatly increases, as explained in 
Optimisation Opportunity 14.
Outdoor air fans (risers)
In many buildings, O/A is provided to AHUs and spaces via masonry or ducted shafts and risers. 
Typically, the O/A fan is controlled by the VSD controller, which maintains a certain static pressure 
in the shaft or a duct (100–200 Pa typically).
As AHUs have their own fans, very often, there is an opportunity to reduce the static pressure set 
point of the O/A fans and their energy consumption. This should be carefully considered on a case-
by-case basis and investigation should include air flow testing.
At very low part-occupancy, i.e. after-hours operation, O/A and spill fans can be shut down 
completely in some circumstances.

======== PAGE 87 ========
Optimising your heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems 79
Getting started
Check existing motors to ensure that they can run at reduced speeds, not all motors can. 
Check that the reduced system output (air flow, water flow or temperature) will not affect 
comfort or productivity.
Integrating multiple HVAC variable speed drive 
controllers
Large centralised HVAC systems frequently employ numerous VSD controllers for various HVAC 
services including:
• CHW (primary and sometimes secondary) and CW flows (water flows)
• HW flow (water flows)
• cooling towers (air flow)
• air-cooled chillers and DX systems (air flow)
• S/A and R/A (air flows)
• DCV (air flow).
The following issues could occur when developing control strategies and control parameters 
involving multiple VSD controllers and other control equipment:
• When deciding whether to reduce the speed of a S/A fan or the amount of CHW, the type of 
chiller, the control arrangement and infrastructure, length of CHW pipework, ductwork, size of 
S/A fan and size of CHW pump(s) should be considered.
• When deciding whether to reduce CHW temperature and thereby reduce CHW pumping costs, 
or to increase CHW temperature and reduce chiller’s energy input, the control arrangement and 
infrastructure, relative humidity control requirements, efficiency of chillers, length of pipework and 
size of pumps should be considered.
• When deciding whether to increase the use of cooling tower fans and water consumption in 
order to reduce the chiller’s energy consumption, the efficiency of chillers, the size of CW pumps, 
seasonal refrigeration load and the size of cooling tower fans should be considered (refer to 
Optimisation Opportunities 7 and 8).
Kitchen hood exhaust and make-up fans
VSD controllers can be used to adjust the air flow of exhaust and make-up air fans in kitchen 
exhaust systems and the like to reflect actual usage rates.
Return air fans
In VAV applications where S/A fans are typically fitted with VSD controllers, R/A fans, if they exist, 
should also be fitted with VSD controllers.
Numerous strategies exist for satisfactory operation and optimisation of R/A fans including plenum 
pressure control and tracking S/A fans. Significant performance and efficiency gains can be made  
with strategies to match the duty of the R/A fan to the S/A fan.
Bathroom exhaust fans
Bathroom exhaust fans can be fitted with VSD controllers if they serve multiple compartments, e.g. 
in multi-story residential apartment buildings, so that they can reduce air flow during periods of low 
system usage (e.g. from 11pm to 5am).

======== PAGE 111 ========
Optimising your heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems 103
IAQ and HVAC energy reduction can have competing priorities and it is easy to reduce energy 
when IAQ is not being maintained. HVAC optimisation must be addressed in terms of using the 
least amount of energy to deliver a fit-for-purpose HVAC solution.
One of the most important factors affecting the IAQ of a building is the O/A ventilation rate. 
Increased ventilation rates usually mean higher IAQ and higher energy consumption; however, 
ventilation strategies are important for the energy efficiency of buildings and careful design of 
systems and the use of optimised control strategies will minimise this impact. 
The requirements for optimal IAQ and energy efficiency do not have to conflict with each other. 
Many strategies and technologies are available that improve IAQ while at the same time having 
a minimal impact on system energy consumption. These include economy cycles, purge cycles, 
demand control ventilation, fan speed control, filtering, heat recovery and localised control of the 
indoor environment. 
IAQ is also an important issue when considering HVAC maintenance and the operating condition 
of the equipment. A well-maintained system will not only enhance the working environment through 
better IAQ, but will also protect an organisation from adverse publicity associated with potential 
failures of ‘duty of care’ under Work Health and Safety regulation. The cost of HVAC system 
maintenance is very small in comparison to the potential costs related to inadequate IAQ.
Periodic testing of IAQ is often a helpful system diagnostic strategy and testing indoor air can often 
uncover broken outdoor air dampers and linkages as well as fan and air distribution issues. A 
NABERS Indoor Environment rating can be used as an effective measure of IAQ.
Submetering
The most effective way of gathering hard data on system performance parameters is through 
submetering. Many existing buildings are unlikely to include this feature. The installation of 
electricity and gas submetering for new buildings greater than 2500 m² floor area is covered in the 
National Construction Code. 
Submeters measure the electricity and gas consumption and demand from individual electrical or 
gas circuits and can be applied to a range of HVAC equipment including chillers, boilers, pumps, 
air handlers, lighting systems, air conditioners and refrigeration systems. Submeter data can be 
used to compare load profiles for a particular piece of equipment, e.g. the chillers, to previously 
measured profiles to identify developing equipment problems or operational inefficiencies.
Submeters are relatively simple and inexpensive to install; however, they are often found 
installed incorrectly or do not work. A typical electrical installation involves monitoring the current 
transformers and voltage sensors placed around the supply cable to the equipment. The meter or 
data logger can send collected data via cable or modem, or wirelessly to a BMS.
Submeters for monitoring water consumption should also be considered for cooling tower make-up, 
water and bleed.

======== PAGE 112 ========
104 Office of Environment and Heritage   
Appendix A: Main areas of energy waste
Area Causes of energy waste
Design/
installation
• Oversized plant and equipment with poor part-load efficiency and operational ability
• Wrongly located and/or installed sensors
• Inadequately specified and programmed BMS hardware and controls algorithms
• Thermal bridging or duct/pipe insulation, equipment insulation, window frames, building fabric
• Excessive air infiltration due to building pressure, facade integrity, zoning
• Excessive minimum O/A ventilation flow rates
• Motor use or missed VSD opportunities
• Inappropriate zoning and to serve areas that have long or unscheduled hours of operation
• Missed energy recovery opportunities e.g. exhaust air, heat recovery from plant
• Air leakage in ducts, connections and access panels
• Balancing and commissioning.
Operational • Excessive operating hours due to over-conservative time schedules that include public holidays
• Control sequences and systems integration e.g. systems not integrated – working against other 
ventilation and smoke control systems 
• Incorrect control set points, i.e. temperature/pressure set points
• Simultaneous heating and cooling, i.e. cooling and heating systems working against each other
• Excessive use of re-heat, which can mask control and operation problems
• Pressure control in AHUs (VAV systems) and in variable-flow pumping systems
• Incorrect economy cycle operation including failure to use O/A for free cooling and/or using 
excessive amounts of O/A during high/low outdoor temperatures
• Ineffective mechanical night purge in buildings with high thermal mass
• Pre-heating/pre-cooling schedules, i.e. using fixed time start/stop rather than optimum start/stop 
(OSS)
• Absence of temperature lock-outs for economy or purge cycles
• Lack of temperature lock-outs for boilers and chillers
• Manual intervention and ad hoc changes to control set points and poor change management 
protocols for the BMS
• Wasteful operation after-hours, rather than operating on demand
• Lack of awareness of BMS functionality and graphical user interface by building operators,  
e.g. diagnostic screens, alarms, trend logs.
Maintenance 
issues
• Focus on compliance issues and reactive maintenance rather than on performance, energy 
efficiency and preventative activities
• Unskilled staff carrying out maintenance
• False or repeatedly ignored alarms
• Incorrectly calibrated temperature, pressure, velocity, flow and humidity sensors
• Dirty or blocked heat exchange surfaces of chillers, boilers, cooling towers and coils
• Clogged or blocked filters, both air and water
• Overridden VSDs
• Overridden economy cycle
• Incorrect refrigerant charge in chillers and DX systems
• Water leaks and excessive water use due to cooling tower bleed and pressure relief valves
• Excessive throttling using dampers or valves, particularly on index circuits
• Equipment left in manual mode on switchboards, VSD drives and or BMS
• Leakage from bypass valves and dampers.