======== PAGE 81 ========
Optimising your heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems 73
Opportunity for optimisation
The following control strategy and control parameters are recommended in order to maximise the 
energy efficiency of refrigeration systems while not compromising their performance:
• Determine the optimal head pressure or calculate for a floating head pressure. Typically, air-
cooled condensing units have the condensing temperature 8–12°C above the ambient dry bulb 
temperature.
• Maintain the optimal head pressure using VSD-controlled motors (or EC motors) on condenser 
fans to control the amount of heat rejection by controlling the speed of the fans.
Figure 18 outlines the maintenance of optimal condensing pressure via a VSD controller, which 
minimises energy consumption of an AC unit.
Energy-saving potential, costs, benefits and risks
Variable head pressure control is typically a cost-effective HVAC energy-efficiency improvement. It 
does require some investment in new drives and/or motors; however, it can immediately reduce the 
energy consumption of the system by reducing the fan power.
This strategy can save up to 30 per cent of energy consumed by condenser fans.
Benefits arising from controlling the head pressure of air-cooled condensers include:
• reduced energy costs
• reduced GHG emissions
• quiet operation, especially during night time when ambient temperature and heat rejection is low
• improved reliability of refrigeration systems
• reduced maintenance costs.
Problems that can be caused by inappropriate head pressure include:
• reduced capacity of AC system
• automated switching off of AC compressors for safety reasons
• insufficient lubricating oil transfer to AC compressors through the AC system
• damage to AC compressors.
Application notes
Maintenance of head pressure using condenser fan speed control can be successfully applied to 
any air-cooled AC system that operates on the vapour compression refrigeration cycle principle.
Getting started
Variable head pressure control strategy optimisation for air-cooled condensers can be 
implemented by establishing the head pressure set point for the equipment and refrigerant 
used, selecting and applying a fan control strategy for modulation of the amount of heat 
rejection, and determining and monitoring the head pressure and outdoor air temperature.

======== PAGE 82 ========
74 Office of Environment and Heritage   
Opportunity 16 — Variable head pressure control  
(water-cooled condensers)
UP 
 TO30% ENERGY REDUCTION ON 
CHILLED WATER PUMPS
Strategy summary
Controlling the head pressure of water-cooled condensers improves the energy efficiency of air 
conditioning systems in part-load conditions. This optimisation strategy involves applying variable 
speed drive (VSD) controllers to pumps for head pressure control of single water-cooled direct 
expansion (DX) units. It also involves applying condenser water (CW) modulating head pressure 
valves for head pressure control of multiple water-cooled, AC DX units supplied by CW from one 
CW pump.
Implementation of this optimisation strategy could result in reduced energy consumption 
of CW pumps by 10–30 per cent and improved control and reliability of the operation of AC 
systems during part-load conditions. 
Principle and equipment
During lower ambient air temperatures, the AC load typically decreases while the capacity of 
condensers increases. Energy savings are therefore possible by reducing the condensing pressure 
of the refrigeration cycle. This reduced pressure can then be maintained by VSD-controlled pumps, 
which would save additional energy compared to a control scenario where the pump is running at 
fixed speed.
Appropriate head pressure or condensing pressure is important for the proper operation of AC and 
refrigeration systems with head pressure maintained in several ways. The most energy efficient 
way of maintaining condensing pressure (constant or, even better, floating set point) of water-
cooled condensers is to adjust the amount of heat rejection in condensers:
• by VSD controllers for single AC units
• via CW-modulating head pressure valves (for multiple AC units, that are supplied CW from one 
CW pump).
For multiple AC units that are supplied CW from a pump controlled by a VSD (such as 
supplementary tenant AC systems), it is also important to automatically shut off the water supply 
to the condenser when the AC unit is not operating. This will significantly reduce the energy 
consumption of the CW pump.
Caution: 
AC systems should maintain adequate condensing (or head) pressure in order to enable the 
proper operation of the vapour compression refrigeration cycle. Supplying more CW than 
required will extract more heat from the condenser, thereby causing over-cooling or over-
condensing of an AC system. Over-condensing reduces the condensing temperature and 
condensing pressure, compromising the performance of the vapour-compression refrigeration 
cycle of the system. 

======== PAGE 83 ========
Optimising your heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems 75
Water cooled 
condenser/chiller
Minimum required information
The minimum required information for maintaining head pressure includes:
• head pressure set point
• control strategy for modulation of the amount of heat rejection
• type of refrigerant.
Minimum required equipment
The minimum required equipment includes:
• field sensors (temperature, pressure)
• controllers and data processors
• CW pump
• if the CW pump supplies CW to multiple DX AC units, a head pressure control is required
• VSD controllers.
Current practice
Most water-cooled condensers employ one of the following common control strategies to maintain 
head pressure:
• constant CW flow as per manufacturer’s requirement
• constant CW flow as per HVAC system designer’s requirements.
Both control strategies ensure sufficient heat rejection during the hottest O/A conditions; however, 
they potentially compromise part-load performance of associated AC DX units due to the risk from 
over-condensing. The additional CW flow also results in wasted energy at the CW pump.
In many buildings, CW continues to circulate through the AC units even when they are not in 
operation, thereby wasting energy at the CW pump.

======== PAGE 84 ========
76 Office of Environment and Heritage   
Opportunity for optimisation
The following control strategy and parameters are recommended in order to maximise the energy 
efficiency of refrigeration systems while not compromising their performance:
• Determine optimal head pressure or calculations for a floating head pressure.
• Maintain optimal head pressure:
1. for single AC units: using VSD controllers to control the amount of heat rejection by 
controlling the speed of condenser pump
2. for multiple AC units fed by a single CW pump: using CW modulating head pressure valves 
to control the amount of heat rejection by controlling the amount of CW entering the condenser.
• When AC units are not in operation, ensure that CW to these units is isolated through a 2-port 
valve.
Energy-saving potential, costs, benefits and risks
Variable head pressure control is typically a cost-effective HVAC energy-efficiency improvement. 
It does require some investment in new drives, valves and controls; however, it can immediately 
reduce the energy consumption of the HVAC system by reducing system pump power.
This strategy can save up to 30 per cent of energy consumed by CW pumps.
Benefits arising from controlling the amount of heat rejection for water-cooled condensers include:
• more reliable operation of refrigeration systems
• reduced energy costs
• reduced GHG emissions
• reduced pump maintenance costs.
Potential risks include:
• inadequate set-up of the head pressure control valves with units either over-condensing 
(unsatisfactory performance and energy wastage at CW pump) or under-condensing 
(unsatisfactory performance, energy wastage at AC unit and risk of units tripping on protection 
devices)
• in open circuit systems, if the CW flow is shut down when the AC unit is not in operation, this 
creates a dead le.g. with the associated risks of corrosion and microbial growth
• supplementary AC units are typically owned and installed by tenants. Failure to seek their 
cooperation before carrying out modifications (such as shutting down CW flow when AC units 
are not in operation) and failure to execute this measure satisfactorily can damage relationships.
Application notes
Maintenance of head pressure using VSD controllers to control the speed of the CW pump 
is applicable for any single water-cooled AC system that operates on a vapour compression 
refrigeration cycle principle.
Maintenance of head pressure using CW head pressure valves to control CW flow of multiple AC 
units fed from one CW pump is applicable for water-cooled AC systems, which operate on a vapour 
compression refrigeration cycle principle.
The installation of 2-port valves to shut off CW supply to AC units when not in operation is best 
carried out during manufacturing when the unit is specified. When retrofitting, it is essential that the 
manufacturer’s advice is sought to prevent nuisance tripping of the units or affecting the warranty of 
the units.

======== PAGE 85 ========
Optimising your heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems 77
Getting started
Variable head pressure control strategy optimisation for water-cooled condensers is 
implemented through similar strategies to those of air-cooled condensers. 
Other variable speed applications for HVAC
Strategy summary
Apart from the uses of VSDs for motors discussed so far, there are many other HVAC applications 
in which VSDs are employed. Some of these are applied to achieve energy savings, while the main 
role of other applications could be to serve as soft-starters i.e. as electrical devices to optimise 
the starting current of motors. As these applications are not essential for major energy savings in 
HVAC systems, but are still important, their basic characteristics are briefly explained below.
Appendix D outlines the relationship between flow rate, pressure and the energy consumed by a 
fan or pump. These affinity laws can be used to estimate energy savings.
Principle and equipment
When retrofitting VSDs, motors should always be checked for their ability to run at reduced speeds. 
Older motors, typically more than 20 years old, may also have insulation that is brittle and the 
installation of VSDs could lead to premature failure. However, in most cases, the cost of a new 
motor will be small in comparison to the potential energy savings and other benefits.
Throttled (choked) 
distribution system

======== PAGE 86 ========
78 Office of Environment and Heritage   
The photo (previous page) shows two partially throttled valves that are being used to regulate the 
water flow through a CW system. The same water flow can be maintained by opening the valves 
and reducing the speed of the pump by using a VSD. This optimisation strategy will save system 
energy as reducing pump speeds reduces pump power consumption (see Section 7 on optimising 
distribution systems).
Opportunity for optimisation
Supply air fans (constant air volume applications) in air handling units
During mild weather conditions, the amount of S/A can often be reduced without compromising 
comfort while saving up to 50 per cent of fan energy.
Typical settings would be:
• speed changes between 70–100 per cent corresponding to O/A temperatures from 23–27°C 
(adjustable)
• the VSD controllers would run the S/A fan at 100 per cent speed if the O/A is higher than 27°C
• the VSD controllers would run the S/A fan at 70 per cent if the O/A is below 23°C
• if the O/A temperature is between 23–27°C, the speed would be adjusted based on a linear 
function between the O/A temperature and the speed of the S/A fan
• an override function would be available to increase the speed of the fan if space temperature 
increases at lower O/A temperatures.
Alternatively, the indoor temperature can be used to control the fan speed.
Minimum O/A flows for ventilation should be sufficient at all times, in line with AS 1668.2 
requirements.
A minimum fan speed/air flow is required to maintain the air diffusion from the S/A registers; motors 
should be checked for allowable speed turndown. 
Primary chilled water pumps
The amount of CHW pumped to the field and the energy consumed by CHW pumps can be 
reduced in response to the reduced cooling load during part-load conditions of HVAC systems.
This potential energy saving is limited by the minimum CHW flow required for associated chillers. 
Primary CHW flow controlled with a VSD varies between a minimum and maximum flow rate and 
is based on the type of chiller. Minimal value is typically set as 10–15 kilopascals (kPa) above CHW 
pressure differential settings for a chiller’s flow switch, to ensure proper operation of the chiller 
during low CHW flow conditions.
With the introduction of a secondary CHW loop, this potential greatly increases, as explained in 
Optimisation Opportunity 14.
Outdoor air fans (risers)
In many buildings, O/A is provided to AHUs and spaces via masonry or ducted shafts and risers. 
Typically, the O/A fan is controlled by the VSD controller, which maintains a certain static pressure 
in the shaft or a duct (100–200 Pa typically).
As AHUs have their own fans, very often, there is an opportunity to reduce the static pressure set 
point of the O/A fans and their energy consumption. This should be carefully considered on a case-
by-case basis and investigation should include air flow testing.
At very low part-occupancy, i.e. after-hours operation, O/A and spill fans can be shut down 
completely in some circumstances.

======== PAGE 87 ========
Optimising your heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems 79
Getting started
Check existing motors to ensure that they can run at reduced speeds, not all motors can. 
Check that the reduced system output (air flow, water flow or temperature) will not affect 
comfort or productivity.
Integrating multiple HVAC variable speed drive 
controllers
Large centralised HVAC systems frequently employ numerous VSD controllers for various HVAC 
services including:
• CHW (primary and sometimes secondary) and CW flows (water flows)
• HW flow (water flows)
• cooling towers (air flow)
• air-cooled chillers and DX systems (air flow)
• S/A and R/A (air flows)
• DCV (air flow).
The following issues could occur when developing control strategies and control parameters 
involving multiple VSD controllers and other control equipment:
• When deciding whether to reduce the speed of a S/A fan or the amount of CHW, the type of 
chiller, the control arrangement and infrastructure, length of CHW pipework, ductwork, size of 
S/A fan and size of CHW pump(s) should be considered.
• When deciding whether to reduce CHW temperature and thereby reduce CHW pumping costs, 
or to increase CHW temperature and reduce chiller’s energy input, the control arrangement and 
infrastructure, relative humidity control requirements, efficiency of chillers, length of pipework and 
size of pumps should be considered.
• When deciding whether to increase the use of cooling tower fans and water consumption in 
order to reduce the chiller’s energy consumption, the efficiency of chillers, the size of CW pumps, 
seasonal refrigeration load and the size of cooling tower fans should be considered (refer to 
Optimisation Opportunities 7 and 8).
Kitchen hood exhaust and make-up fans
VSD controllers can be used to adjust the air flow of exhaust and make-up air fans in kitchen 
exhaust systems and the like to reflect actual usage rates.
Return air fans
In VAV applications where S/A fans are typically fitted with VSD controllers, R/A fans, if they exist, 
should also be fitted with VSD controllers.
Numerous strategies exist for satisfactory operation and optimisation of R/A fans including plenum 
pressure control and tracking S/A fans. Significant performance and efficiency gains can be made  
with strategies to match the duty of the R/A fan to the S/A fan.
Bathroom exhaust fans
Bathroom exhaust fans can be fitted with VSD controllers if they serve multiple compartments, e.g. 
in multi-story residential apartment buildings, so that they can reduce air flow during periods of low 
system usage (e.g. from 11pm to 5am).

======== PAGE 88 ========
80 Office of Environment and Heritage   
Best practice HVAC operation  
and maintenance
The correct operation and maintenance of HVAC systems is extremely important 
for performance and energy efficiency. This section provides an overview of four 
important operation and maintenance strategies that can contribute to HVAC energy 
savings. These are:
• Opportunity 17 – Energy management planning
• Opportunity 18 – Energy management training and awareness 
• Opportunity 19 – Energy efficiency maintenance
• Opportunity 20 – Management of system control software.
six

======== PAGE 89 ========
Optimising your heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems 81
Opportunity 17 — Energy management planning
UP  
 TO 50% TOTAL ENERGY 
REDUCTION
Strategy summary
Adopting an integrated and inclusive approach to energy management is essential in order to 
achieve an ongoing lasting success. 
Energy management planning requires coordination among senior management, site operations 
and maintenance personnel, including electrical, mechanical and HVAC control/BMS contractors. 
The planning needs to be guided by a sustainability team and supported by relevant energy 
management policies, procedures, documentation and training. Transparency of objectives and the 
proactive involvement of all these parties are essential for optimal outcomes. Figure 19 shows the 
range of stakeholders that need to be involved in energy management planning.  
To facilitate a clear understanding of activities and responsibilities, all energy management activity 
should be identified in a facility energy management plan.
Improved energy management 
outcomes:
•   Sufficien t level o f knowledge on:
a. site ene rg y management
b. HVA C equipment
c. HV AC  controls
d. energy efficienc y requirements
•   Modified maintenanc e scope o f wo rk
•   Regular and transparen t re porting 
     on maintenance and performanc e
•   Ene rg y management  documentation
•   Ene rg y management  t raining
•   Regular energ y efficiency  maintenance
•   Energy  efficient  BMS
•   Energy  efficient  HV AC  syste m
•   Better communication
•   Reduced energy costs 
•   Improved building performanc e
•   Delivery o f corporate sustainability goals
External 
maintenance
(sub)contractor 
HVAC, BMS, 
electrical
Internal 
maintenance
staﬀ (HVAC, 
electrical)
Facility 
managers/
operators
Sustainability
team
Sustainability
executives
Senior 
management
Energy management stakeholders
Stak eholders 
inform energy 
management
systems and 
pro cedures
Successful implementation
Figure 19: The influencing factors of energy management
Improved energy management seeks to systematically minimise energy consumption, power 
demand and site greenhouse gas emissions.